== Version 3.013 Release Notes ==

This release of Rel, an implementation of Date & Darwen's "Tutorial D"
database language, improves the user interface, fixes some bugs, adds
support for outer joins, and significantly reduces the size of the Rel
distribution whilst improving startup speed.

The following enhancements have been made:

  - The Rel user interface (known as DBrowser) provides same familiar
    interface but now has significantly fewer Eclipse framework
    dependencies. The result is a smaller distribution and improved
    start-up time.

  - DBrowser: Export option dropped from relvar edit grids, as there
    are other, better facilities for exporting to Excel available on
    right-click menus, etc.

  - DBrowser: Under Preferences, moved alternate output display option
    to Display tab.

  - DBrowser: Improved handling of icon resizing via Preferences. On
    MacOS, all icon sizes change without needing to restart.
  
  - DBrowser: Preferences data is no longer stored in Rel application
    directory; now stored in user's home directory.  This allows
    keeping preferences across Rel updates.

  - DBrowser now supports "remote only" mode where only connections to
    remote databases are possible.  To enable, delete rel0*.jar
    (e.g. rel0000.jar), RelDBMS.jar, and RelTest.jar from lib/rel.
     
  - DBrowser '+' tab now provides list of recently-used databases and
    means to delete entries.  As a result, management entries removed
    from main menu.
    
  - DBrowser: Tweaks to display of RVAs to improve readability.
     
  - DBrowser: Now provides option to create and restore a database
    from a backup as a unified operation.
     
  - Client library: Decoupled Server/ServerV0000 from Client to permit
    use of relclient.jar on its own (plus relshared.jar) to facilitate
    developing purely remote clients.

  - Rel: Added p LEFT JOIN q which returns 
        TUPLE {Matched p JOIN q, Missing p NOT MATCHING q}

  - Rel: Added p RIGHT JOIN q which returns 
        TUPLE {Matched p JOIN q, Missing q NOT MATCHING p}

  - Rel: Added p FULL JOIN q which returns
          TUPLE {
        	Matched p JOIN q, 
        	MissingLeft p NOT MATCHING q, 
        	MissingRight q NOT MATCHING p
          }

  - Build: Module jars now generated via Ant build files; product
    build scripts now generate all jars.

The following bugs have been fixed:

  - DBrowser: The 'comment' visualiser in Rev now handles carriage
    return correctly on all platforms.
    
  - DBrowser: Saving a script with escape chars, e.g., \\blah, loaded
    as \blah. Fixed.

  - DBrowser: Resizing the Rel window whilst in relvar Edit mode
    caused odd problems, such as the content not re-sizing,
    scrollbars disappearing, etc. Fixed.

  - DBrowser: Graphical editing of RVA value did not work due to
    failure to launch RVA editor. Fixed.
 
  - DBrowser/Client: Fixed TUPLE of RVA display problems.
    
  - Rel: parallel RENAME now supported. E.g., 
    TUPLE {x 10, y 20, z 30} RENAME {x AS y, y AS x} works.
    Case #203 fixed.

  - Rel: This threw a fatal error:
    RELATION {TUPLE {RVA RELATION {TUPLE {K 1}}}} 
    	EXTEND {RR := RVA RANK (ASC K AS R)}
    Fixed.

== Version 3.012 Release Notes ==

This release of Rel, an implementation of Date & Darwen's "Tutorial D"
database language, improves the user interface and fixes some bugs.

The following enhancements have been made:

- Rel DBMS: Now provides -q command-line option to disable
  startup/shutdown information messages. This is intended to make it
  easier to implement standalone scripts that produce console output
  for later redirection.
  
- Rel UI: Tabular displays of views, relvars, or expression evaluation
  results (in Rev visual query editor) now provide mechanism to search
  and sort the results.

- Rev visual query editor: Advanced search available in Restrict
  (WHERE) operator.

- Rev visual query editor: A Comment node has been provided, to add
  commentary to a visual query.

- Rel DBMS: new built-in operator SEARCH(t TUPLE{*}, regex CHAR)
  RETURNS BOOLEAN, which returns true if any CAST_AS_CHAR(a), where a
  is an attribute of t, matches regex. This permits general text
  search of tuples, e.g., S WHERE SEARCH(TUP {*}, ".*3.*") returns any
  tuple in S with a '3' in some attribute value.

The following bugs have been fixed:

- Rel UI: In the command-line interface, attempting to execute a
  statement like WRITELN "blah//"; -- or other statement with a string
  with an embedded comment character sequence -- caused syntax error,
  because // was treated as an expression ending in a comment rather
  than a statement. Fixed.

== Version 3.011 Release Notes ==

This release of Rel, an implementation of Date & Darwen's "Tutorial D"
database language, improves the user interface and fixes some bugs.

The following enhancements have been made:

- Rel UI: Opening a relvar in Edit mode now positions the cursor in
  the blank row at the bottom, ready to enter a new tuple.  Cursor
  keys may be used to navigate, and Ctrl/Cmd-Cursor keys may be used
  to jump to top/bottom or right/left.

- Rel UI: Font scaling has been improved when using alternative output
  display on HiDPI Windows displays.

- Rel UI: The bundled Java runtime is now version 8u161.

- Rel DBMS: Using SAME_HEADING_AS(...) in a relation literal heading
  was previously not permitted. E.g., REL SAME_HEADING_AS(S) {} was a
  syntax error.  It is now permitted.
  
- Rel DBMS and Rel Client now check for and correctly handle 'null'
  source code.

The following bugs have been fixed:

- Rel UI: Cut/copy/paste/selectAll drop-down menus and keyboard
  shortcuts now work consistently and are generally available wherever
  they should appear.

- Rel DBMS: ABS(n) always returned a RATIONAL value, even if n was
  INTEGER. Fixed.

- Rel UI: 

  Given: Ubuntu 16.xx, 17.xx and other GTK3 environments.

  Result: Multiple GUI failures similar to those when using the
  Eclipse IDE under GTK3.

  Fixed. Startup forces GTK2. Some issues remain, but at least it's
  usable.

- Rel UI: 

  Given: In the relvar Edit mode, press "Go to INSERT row" button on
  relvar with high enough cardinality to require scrolling.
	
  Result: It was was supposed to do what Ctrl-End should also do:
  position the display on the blank row and put the cursor in it. It
  doesn't.
	
  Fixed. Ctrl-Cursor preferred over Ctrl-End.

- Rev:
	
  Given: Create an Expression and set its text to "WRITELN '&blah'".

  Result: The & won't show. If you change the text to "WRITELN
  '&&blah'", it shows &, but is treated as "WRITELN '&&blah'".  

  Fixed.
  			
- Rel DBMS:
	
  Given: https://reldb.org/forum/viewtopic.php?f=2&t=1527&p=2863#p2863
	
  Result: Fatal error instead of semantic error.
	
  Fix: Now throws semantic error, plus gives a helpful hint for fixing
  a typical error.

- Rel DBMS:

  Given: S GROUP {blah} AS rva
	
  Result: Java NullPointerException due to undefined attribute 'blah'.
	
  Fixed.

== Version 3.010 Release Notes ==

This release of Rel, an implementation of Date & Darwen's "Tutorial D"
database language, improves the user interface and fixes some bugs.

The following enhancements have been made to the user interface:

- Drop-down menus are now provided for most major operations.

- Double-clicking on a database tree item causes focus to be set to
  the contents of the tab.

- Double-click now expands/contracts database tree item headings, in
  addition to the usual keystrokes.

- Variable and View "play" mode shows relation value with improved
  formatting; "edit" is available from the drop-down and pop-up
  (right-click) menus.

- The CPU and memory displays in the lower-right corner now follow the
  typical paradigm of showing resource use, rather than showing
  resource available.

The following enhancements have been made to the DBMS:

- The storage engine has been updated to Berkeley Java DB version
  7.5.11.

- To reduce confusion when copying and pasting code examples that have
  been auto-corrected, the parser now recognises Unicode asymmetric
  quotes (‘ ’ “ ”) and generates a human-friendly error.

The following bugs have been fixed:

- fix: DBMS:
  Given:
	COUNT {S WHERE CITY = CITY, S WHERE STATUS = STATUS}
   Result:
   	Returns type mismatch error when it shouldn't.
  Fixed.

- fix: DBMS:
  Given:
	VAR TEST4 REAL RELATION 
		{ID INTEGER, RVA RELATION {RID INTEGER, STR CHAR}} KEY {ID};
	INSERT TEST4 RELATION {
		TUPLE {ID 1, RVA RELATION 
		{TUPLE {RID 11, STR 'A'}, TUPLE {RID 22, STR 'E'}}}
	};
  Execute:
	UPDATE TEST4 WHERE ID = 1: 
	       {UPDATE RVA WHERE RID = 22: {STR := 'blah'}};
	UPDATE TEST4 WHERE ID = 1: 
	       {UPDATE RVA WHERE RID = 22: {STR := 'blah'}};
  Result: TUPLE {RID 22, STR 'blah'} is incorrectly deleted.
  Fixed.
 
- fix: UI: CSS on exported HTML for tabular displays did not correctly
  format table heading text. Fixed.

- fix: UI: Command-line correctly detects execute vs evaluate by
  ignoring whitespace and comments.

== Version 3.009 Release Notes ==

This is a minor bug-fix release of Rel, an implementation of Date &
Darwen's "Tutorial D" database language.

A performance bottleneck has been corrected that caused slow database
loading and interaction on some networks.

The bundled Java JRE has been updated to version 8u151.

== Version 3.008 Release Notes ==

This is a minor bug-fix release of Rel, an implementation of Date &
Darwen's "Tutorial D" database language. There was a bug in INSERT
that caused additional KEY constraints to be ignored. For example,
given the following:

VAR myvar REAL RELATION {x INT, y INT} KEY {x} KEY {y};
INSERT myvar REL {TUP {x 1, y 1}};

The following would correctly report 0 tuples inserted:

INSERT myvar REL {TUP {x 2, y 1}};

But would erroneously insert the tuple. This has been corrected.

The Berkeley Java DB library (used to implement the storage engine)
has been updated to version 7.4.5, and the Java JRE has been updated
to version 8u144.

== Version 3.007 Release Notes ==

This is a minor release of Rel, an implementation of Date & Darwen's
"Tutorial D" database language. It adds EQUIV and RANK operators,
slightly tweaks the Tutorial D grammar implementation to reduce the
need for parentheses, provides infix invocation for certain operators,
and fixes some bugs.

The following enhancements have been made to the Rel implementation of
Tutorial D:

- Infix syntax for EXTEND, SUMMARIZE and UPDATE expressions is now
  available. The prefix syntax has been retained, but these are now
  allowed:

   S EXTEND {SS := STATUS}
   S EXTEND: {SS := STATUS}
   S SUMMARIZE BY {CITY} {SS := SUM(STATUS)}
   S SUMMARIZE BY {CITY}: {SS := SUM(STATUS)}
   S UPDATE {STATUS := 2}
   S UPDATE: {STATUS := 2}

- Dyadic and monadic relational operators now have equal precedence,
  except WHERE (lower precedence) and projection (higher
  precedence). This means operators may often be "chained" naturally
  without requiring parentheses.  E.g., S RENAME {CITY AS PLACE} WRAP
  {PLACE, STATUS} AS T is allowed, where previously (S RENAME {CITY AS
  PLACE}) WRAP {PLACE, STATUS} AS T would have been required. This
  should not affect existing code.

- RANK has been implemented, per Date & Darwen's "Data Types and the
  Relational Model". Both prefix and infix syntax are available:

   RANK S BY (ASC STATUS AS Ranking) 
   S RANK BY (ASC STATUS AS Ranking) 
   S RANK (ASC STATUS AS Ranking)

- EQUIV has been implemented, per Date & Darwen's "Database
  Explorations".

The following bugs have been fixed:

- Case #139 - #142: In the Rel UI, a fatal error was sometimes
  inappropriately generated when a query was cancelled in the
  command-line view. This has been fixed.

- Case #153: Errors in built-in or user-defined Java-based operators
  now generate an error message rather than causing a fatal error.

== Version 3.006 Release Notes ==

This is a minor maintenance release of Rel, an implementation of Date
& Darwen's "Tutorial D" database language. It makes some improvements
to the Rel user interface, now provides a selection of built-in
operators that previously had to be loaded from a script, and fixes
various minor bugs.

IMPORTANT NOTE: Once opened with this or later versions of Rel,
                databases cannot be read by earlier versions.

The following enhancements have been made:

- In the Rel DBMS, all operators previously found in the
  UsefulOperatorsAndViews.rel script are now built-in, and the
  sys.OperatorsBuiltin relvar provides documentation of built-in
  relvars via the Definition attribute. In the Rel UI, this can be
  displayed by double-clicking on an Operator, or by pressing the
  associated Play button.

- The Rel DBMS's storage engine has been updated to Oracle Berkeley DB
  JE version 7.3.7

- The Rel DBMS now supports external Rel DBMS relvars. This requires
  that a standalone Rel DBMS be running on the specified host.  
  E.g.:
     VAR myvar EXTERNAL RELVAR "host,username,password,relvarname"; 
     VAR myvar EXTERNAL RELVAR "host,user,pass,vname,1234"; // port is 1234

- The Rel DBMS now provides built-in QUOTE(CHAR) RETURNS CHAR and
  UNQUOTE(CHAR) RETURNS CHAR operators to quote/unquote delimiters and
  special characters.

The following bugs have been fixed:
         
- Rel DBMS: External relvar column name cleanup erroneously turned 'g'
  and 'i' to '_'. Fixed.

- Rel DBMS: Extraneous spaces are no longer inserted into EXTERNAL
  ACCDB and EXTERNAL JDBC relvar definitions.

- Rel DBMS: The UPDATE operator (not statement) allowed duplicate
  tuples to be emitted. Fixed.

- Rel DBMS: The IN operator sometimes returned an incorrect result if
  the tuple operand had a different attribute order from the relation
  operand. Fixed.

- Rel UI: In Rev, single quotes in a RESTRICT, EXTEND, SUMMARIZE or
  UPDATE expression caused the expression not to be saved. Fixed.

== Version 3.005 Release Notes ==

This is a minor maintenance release of Rel, an implementation of Date &
Darwen's "Tutorial D" database language. It makes some improvements to
the Rel user interface, adds some system relvars, and fixes two bugs.

IMPORTANT NOTE: Once opened with this or later versions of Rel, 
                databases cannot be read by earlier versions.

The following enhancements have been made:

- The Rel user interface's REAL relvar design view has been
  aesthetically improved -- the command-line display can be hidden or
  revealed by clicking a button.

- The Rel user interface's REAL relvar design view now prompts the
  user if an attempt is made to close a tab without first applying
  pending changes.

- The Rel user interface now provides user-friendly support for
  creating external relvars via dialog boxes.

- The Rel DBMS provides a sys.ExternalRelvarTypes relvar that
  documents the available external relvar types.

- The Rel DBMS provides a sys.Keywords relvar that lists all keywords
  in the Rel / Tutorial D language grammar.

The following bugs have been fixed:

- Case #135: Rel UI: Special characters now work correctly under
  Windows.

- Case #136: Rel UI: The command-line entry panel is now always in
  focus after executing code.

== Version 3.004 Release Notes ==

This is a maintenance release of Rel, an implementation of Date &
Darwen's "Tutorial D" database language. It fixes some bugs, and
provides some minor enhancements including a faster GROUP operator,
the ability to use Unicode character symbols for certain operators,
and some refinements to the Rel user interface.

The following enhancements have been made:

- Case #133: The Rel command-line's 'Save' operation's default
  filename and path is now set to the filename and path of the most
  recent 'Load file' operation.

- !!SP or !!(SP) is now equivalent to IMAGE_IN(SP), and !!(SP, TUP{x
  1}) is equivalent to IMAGE_IN(SP, TUP {x 1}). This brings Rel into
  line with Date & Darwen's "Database Explorations" text.

- The following Unicode operator symbols are now supported: 
  ≤ Less than or equal 
  ≥ Greater than or equal 
  ≠ Not equal 
  × Scalar multiplication 
  ÷ Scalar division 
  ‼ Image in (see above) 
  ⊂ Proper subset 
  ⊆ Subset 
  ⊃ Proper superset 
  ⊇ Superset 
  ∈ Is element of (alias for IN)

- In the Rel user interface's command-line entry panel (the lower
  panel of any command-line), a button has been provided to launch a
  dialog box to facilitate entering the above Unicode operators.

- The GROUP operator is now significantly faster, at the expense of
  somewhat increased memory consumption.

Note: The Unicode support described above has been found to be buggy
on (at least) Windows 7 and Windows 10. This will be corrected in a
future update. It works correctly on OS X and Linux.

The following bugs have been fixed:

- Case #134: In the Rel user interface, the command-line entry panel
  now consistently focuses on highlighted errors. This makes it
  possible to immediately type a correction without having to click on
  the entry panel.

- Due to a bug in the GROUP operator, the following produced an
  incorrect result:

   RELATION {TUPLE {SID 1, PID 1}, TUPLE {SID 4, PID 5}} GROUP {PID}
      AS PARTS UNION RELATION {TUPLE {SID 1, PARTS RELATION {TUPLE
      {PID 1}}}, TUPLE {SID 4, PARTS RELATION {TUPLE {PID 5}}}}

  This has been corrected.

- In the Rel user interface's visual query language, the "View Query"
  '?' dialog invoked from any query node no longer crashes after
  changing mode.

- In the Rel user interface, viewing a VIEW or relvar with no
  attributes no longer crashes.

- In the Rel user interface, the 'Zoom in or out' button in the
  command-line mode is now positioned correctly in its
  toolbar. Previously, it was positioned too far to the right.

== Version 3.003 Release Notes ==

This is a maintenance release of Rel, an implementation of Date &
Darwen's "Tutorial D" database language. The most significant new
feature is the ability to connect to external CSV files, XLS and XLSX
spreadsheets, Microsoft Access databases, and JDBC database
connections, and represent their contents as relation-valued variables
(aka relvars). Facilities have also been provided to easily export
relvars and query results as CSV and spreadsheet (XLS or XLSX) files.

IMPORTANT NOTE: Once opened with this or later versions of Rel, 
                databases cannot be read by earlier versions.

The following enhancements have been made:

- Support for UNORDER() (the inverse of ORDER(), to convert an ARRAY
  to a RELATION) has been added to the visual query editor in the Rel
  user interface.

- In the Rel user interface, a "refresh" toolbar item has been added
  to VIEWs, the same as for VARiables.

- In the Rel user interface, the visual query editor's "View Query"
  '?' dialog now provides option to emit query text, or VIEW and
  OPERATOR definitions, directly to command-line. Furthermore, the
  dialog box is no longer modal; makes it easier to use query
  definition elsewhere.

- In the Rel user interface's command-line, the initial use of the
  Save dialog defaults to directory of the most recent Load, if Load
  used first. Likewise, the initial Load dialog defaults to directory
  of most recent Save, if Save is used first.

- In the Rel user interface, Variables (relvars), Views, and visual
  query results may now be exported to CSV text files and XLS/XLSX
  spreadsheet files.

- In the standalone Rel DBMS, all application .jars have been moved to
  the /lib subdirectory.

- Support for accessing CSV files, XLS/XLSX spreadsheet files,
  Microsoft Access databases, and JDBC databases for various popular
  DBMSs, and representing their contents as relation-valued variables
  (relvars) is now built-in.

 External relvars are of the form: 

 VAR <varname> EXTERNAL <kind> <connection_string> [ DUP_REMOVE |
      DUP_COUNT | AUTOKEY ];

   <kind> is the kind of external relvar. Built-in are CSV, XLS, JDBC
      and ACCDB. Additional kinds, and JDBC drivers, can be put in the
      Extensions directory of a Rel database, but are only recognised
      by the standalone RelDBMS.

   <connection_string> is a CHAR specific to the kind of external
      relvar.

   DUP_REMOVE silently removes duplicate tuples.

   DUP_COUNT adds an INTEGER attribute named _DUP_COUNT that indicates
      a count of duplicate tuples.
      
   AUTOKEY adds an INTEGER attribute named _AUTOKEY that is serially
      numbered. In the absence of DUP_REMOVE, DUP_COUNT, or AUTOKEY,
      the default is AUTOKEY.

 Examples: 

  VAR myvar EXTERNAL CSV "/home/dave/test.csv";

  VAR myvar EXTERNAL CSV "/home/dave/test.csv,HOHEADING" DUP_REMOVE;

  VAR myvar EXTERNAL XLS "/home/dave/test.xls" DUP_REMOVE;

  VAR myvar EXTERNAL XLS "/home/dave/test.xlsx" DUP_COUNT;

  VAR myvar EXTERNAL XLS "/home/dave/test.xlsx,1" DUP_COUNT;

  VAR myvar EXTERNAL XLS "/home/dave/test.xls,2,NOHEADING" DUP_REMOVE;

  VAR myvar EXTERNAL JDBC
      "jdbc:postgresql://localhost/database,sqluser,sqluserpw,MyTable"
      AUTOKEY;

  VAR myvar EXTERNAL ACCDB "c:\\users\\me\\mydb.accdb,mytable";

  VAR myvar EXTERNAL ACCDB "c:\\users\\me\\mydb.accdb,mytable"
      DUP_REMOVE;

 NOTE: In the XLS connection string, the number after the optional ','
       indicates the zero-based tab number.

 NOTE: In the XLS & CSV connection string, NOHEADING indicates that
       the spreadsheet does not have a heading row.

 Built-in JDBC support is provided for MySQL, MariaDB, PostgreSQL,
 Oracle Database and Microsoft SQL Server. E.g.:

  VAR myvar EXTERNAL JDBC
      "jdbc:mysql://localhost/database,sqluser,sqluserpw,MyTable";

  VAR myvar EXTERNAL JDBC
      "jdbc:mariadb://localhost/database,sqluser,sqluserpw,MyTable";
      
  VAR myvar EXTERNAL JDBC
      "jdbc:postgresql://localhost/database,sqluser,sqluserpw,MyTable";
      
  VAR myvar EXTERNAL JDBC
      "jdbc:oracle:thin:@localhost:1521:database,sqluser,sqluserpw,MyTable";
      
  VAR myvar EXTERNAL JDBC
      "jdbc:sqlserver://localhost:1433;databaseName=db,user,userpw,MyTable";

The following bugs have been fixed:

- In the Rel user interface, spaces in application path caused
  external Java-based operator compilation to fail. Fixed.

- In the Rel user interface, the "Get File Path" button now correctly
  returns backslashes in file path as '\\'.
  
- In the Rel user interface, failing to open a database could allow
  all database tabs to be closed, which left the Rel UI in an unstable
  state. Fixed.

== Version 3.002 Release Notes ==

This is a minor maintenance release of Rel, an implementation of Date
& Darwen's "Tutorial D" database language.

The following enhancements have been made:

- The Rel user interface can now load a specified database from the
  operating system command-line. E.g.: 
  	    Rel "c:\Users\Dave\My Database"

- The Rel user interface now provides an option to specify that the
  user's default database should not be automatically displayed in a
  tab when the Rel user interface is launched. See Preferences |
  General | Do not automatically load user's default database.

The following bugs have been fixed:

- If the database path contained spaces, it would cause Java-based
  operators to fail to compile when being defined. This has been
  fixed.

- Opening a new database tab would sometimes hide the mode
  (Rel/Rev/Cmd) buttons. This has been fixed.

- Under Windows, double-clicking on an *.rdb or *.rel file in the file
  explorer failed to start up Rel and load the specified database or
  file despite specifying appropriate file associations. This has been
  fixed.  Note that file associations must be set via the operating
  system.

== Version 3.001 Release Notes ==

This is a minor maintenance release of Rel, an implementation of Date
& Darwen's "Tutorial D" database language.

The following enhancements have been made:

- A startup progress bar displays whilst the Rel user interface is
  loading. On slow machines, this makes it clear that loading is
  progressing and not stuck.

- More detailed crash reporting has been implemented, to help the
  development team find and fix bugs.

- An ATTRIBUTES_OF(r) pseudo-operator has been provided. It may be
  used anywhere a comma-separated list of attributes can appear.
  E.g., WITH (t := TUPLE {STATUS 20}): (S JOIN RELATION {t})
  {ATTRIBUTES_OF(t)} or WITH (t := TUPLE {STATUS 20}): (S JOIN
  RELATION {t}) {ALL BUT ATTRIBUTES_OF(t)}

The following bugs have been fixed:

- In the Rel user interface, a crash occurred in Windows when showing
  row/tuple delete confirmation. This has been fixed.

- Case #94: org.reldb.rel.v0.languages.tutoriald.parser.TokenMgrError
  should have been ExceptionSemantic, not ExceptionFatal.

- Case #113 - #118: A crash in the Rel UI when editing a relvar with
  no attributes has been fixed.

- Case ID #119: VAR test BASE RELATION {x INTEGER, y INTEGER} INIT
  (TUPLE {x 10, y 20}) KEY {}; threw a fatal exception that should
  have been a semantic exception. This has been fixed.

== Version 3.000 Release Notes ==

This is a major release of Rel, an implementation of Date & Darwen's
"Tutorial D" database language. It introduces a new graphical "front
end" user interface that provides rich desktop database management
functionality and a native look-and-feel on Windows, Mac OS X, and
Linux. It is the starting point for what will be a significant focus
on friendly, end-user oriented functionality in forthcoming releases.

As part of this release, the version numbering system has changed. The
entire Rel release, including the standalone DBMS and the
user-interface, is version 3.000. The standalone DBMS carries on the
Rel version numbering from before; the last release was version 1.0.12
so the standalone DBMS is now version 1.0.13.

Rel now runs under Java 8. Running a standalone Rel DBMS requires that
it be installed, but a typical Rel distribution including the user
interface bundles a Java runtime, so it's usually not necessary to
download Java separately.

The source code is now available on GitHub under
https://github.com/DaveVoorhis/Rel and is easily loaded into the
Eclipse IDE to facilitate further development.

Major features of the new user interface include:

1. Displaying, editing, and designing relation-valued variables,
operators, constraints, types, queries (expressions), and other
database objects can now be done via a graphical interface, in
addition to the traditional command-line.

2. Code entry is now enhanced with syntax highlighting, find/replace,
undo/redo, persistent edit history, and "zoom" buttons to maximize the
input or output display. Rel scripts may be saved in and retrieved
from the database.

3. A graphical query language called Rev, based on a data-flow
metaphor, is fully integrated and generates Tutorial D / Rel code.

4. The backup facility is now fully integrated. Database backups can
be made at the click of a button and do not rely on an external
script.

5. The default database is created in the user's home directory,
rather than inside the Rel program folder or directory. Other
databases can be easily loaded from the user interface and multiple
local and remote databases can be used simultaneously.

Significant enhancements have also been made to the Rel implementation
of the Tutorial D database language:

1. TUPLE {*} now returns the "current tuple" in any open
expression. TUPLE {*} is equivalent to TUPLE {A1 A1, ..., AAn}, where
A1, ..., An are the attributes of an implied relation such as the
relation operand to an invocation of WHERE or EXTEND.  The keyword
TUPLE can be abbreviated to TUP, as in other places where it appears
in the language.

2. IMAGE_IN(r, t) where r is a relation and t is a tuple, is
equivalent to (r JOIN RELATION {t}) {ALL BUT A1, ..., An}, where A1,
..., An are the attributes of t. The tuple operand to IMAGE_IN may be
omitted, defaulting to TUPLE {*}. Thus, IMAGE_IN(r) is equivalent to
!!r as proposed in Date & Darwen's Database Explorations, Chapter 14.

3. ARRAY TUPLE {...} is now a valid parameter type.

4. User-defined aggregate operators are now supported, as described in
http://reldb.org/c/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/User-Defined-Aggregate-Operators-in-Tutorial-D-and-Rel.pdf

5. Altering relvar definitions is now supported via:
   ALTER VAR <relvar> TYPE_OF <attrname> TO <newattrtype>
   ALTER VAR <relvar> RENAME <oldattrname> AS <newattrname>
   ALTER VAR <relvar> INSERT <newattrname> <newattrtype>
   ALTER VAR <relvar> DROP <attrname>  
   ALTER VAR <relvar> KEY {<keyspec>} [... KEY {<keyspec>}] (must be last)

6. All data definition statements are now logged in sys.DefinitionHistory.

7. SET_UNIQUE_NUMBER(INT) built-in operator has been provided and is
used in the DatabaseToScript.rel script.

8. IF, CASE, DO, WHILE, FOR and OPERATOR definitions now support
multiple statements without requiring BEGIN .. END blocks.

9. Keywords IF, CASE, DO, WHILE, FOR and OPERATOR are now optional
after the END that closes a block.

10. POSSREP component definitions may now be surrounded with "( ... )"
(preferred) or "{ ... }" (deprecated).

11. Updated storage engine to Oracle Berkeley DB JE version 7.0.6
  
12. External Java compilation is now fully integrated; a JDK is no
longer required.

13. System startup announcement now provides more information about
the runtime platform.

14. Removed octal and hex integer representations, as these were a
source of confusion.

15. Empty EXTEND, e.g., EXTEND S: {}, is now permitted.

16. Empty UPDATE, e.g., UPDATE S: {}, is now permitted.

17. Added a sequence generator built-in operator:
OPERATOR SEQUENCE(first INT, last INT, step INT) RELATION {n INT};
OPERATOR SEQUENCE(first INT, last INT) RELATION {n INT};

18. TYPE_OF(e) pseudo-operator returns type metadata about any
expression using new built-in types TypeInfo, Scalar and NonScalar.

19. The sys.Catalog relvar now provides Attributes and Keys metadata.

20. Relvar update notices can be turned off with 
SET VerboseRelvarUpdates Off.

21. All relations are now emitted with their heading. This improves
readability & parse-ability.

22. A modulo operator (%) is now built-in. E.g., 3 % 4 is a valid
expression.

23. A bug has been fixed: UNION (RELATION {x RELATION {y INT}} {}, x)
returned an error. It should have returned RELATION {y INT}} {}. The
same applies to D_UNION and XUNION. This has been corrected.

For more information or to download Rel, go to http://reldb.org
